# School Crime and Safety<br/>STAT  471 Final Project<br/>Katherine Lee, Mark Rauschkolb<br/>December 20, 2021

Sandy Hook Elementary School and Santa Fe High School are synonymous with school shootings and violence. While national trends show that violence and victimization has declined from 1992 to 2017, there is a sentiment that the number of school shootings is increasing, mainly due to a steep increase in multiple-victim homicides (as opposed to single-victim homicides), revealing that the topic of school violence is still very relevant. On top of this, smaller instances of school crime are often forgotten even though they are still abundant and extremely detrimental to educational outcomes and children safety. For our final project, we decided to look into which variables were predictive of crimes and incidents of violence across US schools throughout 2015. While only analyzing 2015 school trends inherently limits the generalizability of our results, we believe the analysis draws high-level conclusions about school crime trends.

We draw from two different types of datasets: school-level data and county-level data. We used school-level data from the [Urban Institute Education Portal](https://educationdata.urban.org/documentation/schools.html#overview) to understand what school-specific features may be predictive of school crime. Using this portal, we were able to access data from: the National Center for Education Statistics’ Common Core of Data (CCD), the Civil Rights Data Collection (CRDC), the US Department of Education’s EDFacts, and IPUMS’ National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS). Specifically, we pulled: school-level directory / geographic data, school finance data, teacher and staff data, discipline instances, and crime incidences. Moreover, we used county-level data to analyze school crime macro-trends. This county-level data came from [US Economic Research Service](https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/county-level-data-sets/download-data/), [US Quarterly Census of Employment and wages](https://markbergen-shiny.shinyapps.io/county_data_dashboard_v2/), and [Census Bureau's Demographic data](https://data.world/bdill/county-level-population-by-race-ethnicity-2010-2019). Specifically, we pulled: unemployment, education, poverty, wage, and demographic data. Our response variable was total crime per 1,000 students enrolled (square root transformed). We created this variable by adding a variety of crime incidents (rape, assault, robbery, etc.) and dividing it by the schools' respective student enrollment. 

Before running any analyses, we split our data into a training dataset and a testing dataset. Because of the heavily-skewed nature of our response variable of interest, total crime incidents per 1,000 students (many schools reported 0 crimes), we square-root transformed the response, which resulted in more symmetric data. Then, on our training data, we explored our data to understand correlations between the features and between the features and the response. To understand the predictors of total crime per 1000 enrolled students and make a predictive model, we built six different models, with the end goal of selecting the best model with the best performance. Specifically, we built an OLS regression, ridge regression, lasso regression, pruned regression decision tree, random forest, and boosting model.

We found that the tree-based methods outperformed the regression-based methods, suggesting a non-linear relationship between the features and response variable. In the end, the tuned boosting model performed yielded the best predictive model when evaluated on our testing dataset. Throughout all models, we consistently saw similar variables surface as highly predictive of total crime. In general, we noticed that school-specific variables influenced school crime much more than broad demographic variables. Specifically, we identified threats, suspensions and teacher salaries as key factors that contribute towards total crime. Ultimately, we hope our analysis can inform school officials regarding school policies and school budget allocation to better understand crime risk factors.